# Mipsdis

`mipsdis` is a MIPS bytecode disassembler that can run on the command line and
in the browser.

It uses source code generation to build C, ruby and javascript
versions of the core disassembler routines.

See:

* [An outline of all the modules in the source](outline.md)
* [Blog article](http://blog.loadzero.com/blog/announcing-mipsdis/)  
* [Browser Demo](http://blog.loadzero.com/demo/mipsdis/demo.html)

## Demonstration

The Javascript version of `mipsdis` runs in the browser.

You can try it out here:

* [Browser Demo](http://blog.loadzero.com/demo/mipsdis/demo.html)

The C version of `mipsdis` runs from the command-line. Here is an example of
its usage:

    $ ./bin/mipsdis test/hello.txt

    80001000:	3c048000	lui $4,0x8000
    80001004:	34844000	ori $4,$4,0x4000
    80001008:	3c05b400	lui $5,0xb400
    8000100c:	34a503f8	ori $5,$5,0x3f8
    80001010:	80860000	lb $6,0($4)
    80001014:	10c00005	beq $6,$0,0x8000102c
    80001018:	00000000	sll $0,$0,0x0
    8000101c:	a0a60000	sb $6,0($5)
    80001020:	24840001	addiu $4,$4,1
    80001024:	08000404	j 0x80001010
    80001028:	00000000	sll $0,$0,0x0
    8000102c:	3c05bfbf	lui $5,0xbfbf
    80001030:	34a50004	ori $5,$5,0x4
    80001034:	3c060000	lui $6,0x0
    80001038:	34c6002a	ori $6,$6,0x2a
    8000103c:	a0a60000	sb $6,0($5)

If you wish to disassemble an existing MIPS binary, you will need to adapt it
into the format that `mipsdis` understands. For a raw binary---that is, a bare
binary file just containing opcodes and no metadata, as you might get from
extracting part of an executable or from a memory dump---you can use `mipsdis`
as a filter.

    $ xxd -o 0x80001000 -c 4 -g 4 test/hello.bin | awk '{print $1,$2}' | ./bin/mipsdis -

    80001000:	3c048000	lui $4,0x8000
    80001004:	2484203c	addiu $4,$4,8252
    80001008:	3c05b400	lui $5,0xb400
    8000100c:	34a503f8	ori $5,$5,0x3f8
    ...

The pipeline shown above hexdumps the raw binary file `test/hello.bin`,
extracts the address and opcode column, and then disassembles the results with
`mipsdis` (using the '-' option to read the input from stdin). Note that the
starting address `0x80001000` needs to be specified because the raw binary file
does not contain this information. Without it, branch offsets and jump targets
would not be decoded correctly.

For convenience, [scripts/rawdump.sh](scripts/rawdump.sh) can be used to do the
same thing.

    $ ./scripts/rawdump.sh test/hello.bin 0x80001000 | ./bin/mipsdis -

    80001000:	3c048000	lui $4,0x8000
    ...

To disassemble a binary in a specific format, such as ELF, you will need to use
the appropriate tool, such as `objdump` or `gdb`, to extract the opcodes.

    $ file test/hello

    test/hello: ELF 32-bit MSB executable, MIPS, MIPS32 version 1 (SYSV), statically linked, not stripped

    $ mips-baremetal-elf-objdump -d test/hello | grep '^[0-9a-f]\{8\}:' |awk '{print $1,$2}' | ./bin/mipsdis -

    80001000:	3c048000	lui $4,0x8000
    80001004:	2484203c	addiu $4,$4,8252
    80001008:	3c05b400	lui $5,0xb400
    8000100c:	34a503f8	ori $5,$5,0x3f8
    ...

The Ruby and Javascript versions of `mipsdis` function identically to the C
version.

### Ruby

    $ ./bin/mipsdis.rb test/hello.txt

    80001000:	3c048000	lui $4,0x8000
    ...

### Javascript

    $ nodejs ./bin/mipsdis.js test/hello.txt

    80001000:	3c048000	lui $4,0x8000
    ...

## Building

To get the source and run it:

    git clone https://github.com/loadzero/mipsdis.git && cd mipsdis
    ./configure.sh
    make
    make test

The configure script will check for these dependencies:

- make
- ruby
- nodejs (optional)

`nodejs` is an optional dependency that is used only to test the auto-generated
Javascript code. If it is not found, then that test is skipped. I did not
really feel like adding it as a hard dependency.

I have tested on OSX 10.11.6 and Ubuntu 16.04. Other unix variants are likely
to work with minimal or no changes.

The code is tested by running [test/input.txt](test/input_small.txt) through
each disassembler and ensuring that
[test/expected.txt](test/expected_small.txt) is the result.

The test input was generated by a fuzzer script that uses
[tables/opcode_bits.txt](tables/opcode_bits.txt) and
[tables/dispatch_tables.txt](tables/dispatch_tables.txt)
to generate test cases.

The expected output was generated by running the test input through `objdump`
and filtering the output slightly to match the style used by `mipsdis`.

## Mipsgen

I wrote [mipsgen](scripts/mipsgen.rb) to do the heavy lifting of generating the
bulk of the code for each version of the disassembler. It currently supports
the generation of C, Javascript and Ruby source code.

The metadata used by `mipsgen` was created by a process of reading the
architecture manuals and then compiling the information on each mnemonic into a
form that makes sense for both humans and machines.

The resultant metadata is contained in these files:

* [tables/dispatch_tables.txt](tables/dispatch_tables.txt) is used to drive
decoder switch statements.  
* [tables/opcode_bits.txt](tables/opcode_bits.txt) specifies the bitwise layout
of each opcode.  
* [tables/asm_format.txt](tables/asm_format.txt) specifies the human readable
format of each mnemonic.  
* [tables/field_format.txt](tables/field_format.txt) specifies the printf format
of fields inside `asm_format`.  

`mipsgen` parses this data, and then hands it off to specific code generation
routines that generate the appropriate switch statements and formatting code
for each language.

This keeps the amount of language-specific code for each disassembler down to
around 300 lines. The amount of auto-generated code is around 1300 lines for
each version.

`mipsgen` is invoked by the build system of `mipsdis` as part of the process of
building the different versions of the disassembler.

It can be invoked directly like this:

    $ ./scripts/mipsgen.rb js

    ...
    function decode_j(pc, op)
    {
        return sprintf("j 0x%x", gettarget(pc,op));
    }
    ...

## Extending mipsdis

The process for adding another language like python to the code generator is as
follows:

- Copy [codegen/rbgen.rb](codegen/rbgen.rb) to `codegen/pygen.rb`
- Adjust the method names accordingly
- Modify the print statements in `py_emit_decoder` and `py_gen_switch` to emit
  the appropriate python code.
- Port [disasm/rb/mipsdis.rb](disasm/rb/mipsdis.rb) to `disasm/py/mipsdis.py`.

The process for adding new opcodes is shown below:

- Add the correct entry to
  [tables/dispatch_tables.txt](tables/dispatch_tables.txt)
- Add the bitwise layout of the opcode to
  [tables/opcode_bits.txt](tables/opcode_bits.txt)
- Add the format of the command to
  [tables/asm_format.txt](tables/asm_format.txt) and
  [tables/field_format.txt](tables/field_format.txt)
- If the new opcode introduces new fields or a new interpretation of those
  fields, new `field_xxx` and `getxxx` functions will have to be added. See
  `field_m` and `getbroff` in [disasm/c/mipsdis.c](disasm/c/mipsdis.c) for
  details.

## Documentation

Apart from this post, there are a few other bits and pieces of documentation that are worth looking at.

There is an outline of the code [here](outline.md) that contains a summary of
each module. The modules are listed in topological order.

Each file in the project has (or should have) a blurb at the top that contains
a verbose description of what it is and why it is present. If necessary, the
blurb contains cross references to other related files.

There is some more documentation on the code generation, as well as a static
copy of the auto-generated code, inside the `docs/` directory.

See [docs/cgen.md](docs/cgen.md) for the C version.  
See [docs/jsgen.md](docs/jsgen.md) for the Javascript version.  
See [docs/rbgen.md](docs/rbgen.md) for the Ruby version.  

## Links

This information is very handy w.r.t MIPS coding:

1. [MIPS Registers](http://www.cs.uwm.edu/classes/cs315/Bacon/Lecture/HTML/ch05s03.html)
2. [MIPS Instruction Formats](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MIPS_Assembly/Instruction_Formats)
3. [MIPS Instruction Reference (basic subset)](http://www.mrc.uidaho.edu/mrc/people/jff/digital/MIPSir.html)
4. [MIPS32 Architecture for Programmers Vol 2](http://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs3410/2015sp/MIPS_Vol2.pdf)
5. [MIPS32 4K User's manual](https://imagination-technologies-cloudfront-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/documentation/MD00016-2B-4K-SUM-01.18.pdf)
